---
layout: single
title:  "About JRPGs"
date:   2021-01-20 10:10:14 -0300
categories: jrpgs
---

Recently, I've decided to try and adapt H. P. Lovecraft's  ["The Dream-Quest
of Unknown
Kadath"](https://www.hplovecraft.com/writings/texts/fiction/dq.aspx)  as a
JRPG-styled game. TVTropes uses the term  [Eastern
RPG](https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/EasternRPG), but I will be
using JRPG, as  it's the one I've seen the most. I'm using Godot as the
engine. 

As a disclaimer, I'm a _huge_ [Chrono
Trigger](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chrono_Cross) fan, so it's quite
possible it will end up having many  similarities to it. However, in the
spirit of exploring some variations in game design, I've been  playing through
[Final Fantasy VI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI).  I've also
played [Chrono Cross](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chrono_Cross), [Golden
Sun](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Sun), many Pok√©mon games, [Mario &
Luigi: Partners in
Time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mario_%26_Luigi:_Partners_in_Time), 
[Radiant Historia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiant_Historia) (even
though I haven't finished  it, I managed to get to the final arc, IIRC),
[Undertale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Undertale), and some  [Xenoblade
Chronicles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xenoblade_Chronicles). I'd also like
to check  info on [Earthbound](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EarthBound)
series.

I'll be writing my observations on battle systems, art styles and whatnot :)
Most of the game references will come from my own gaming experience, so they
may be outdated and incomplete.